.Dd $Mdocdate: November 4 2022 $
.Dt MMV 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mmv
.Nd move multiple files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility opens a file populated with the file names given by
.Ar
in the editor specified by the
.Ev EDITOR
environment variable.
The user can then make changes to the file names in their editor, and when the
editor is closed
.Nm
will move the files according to the changes made within the editor after
ensuring that the moving of files is safe.
.Pp
In order to ensure that all the files can be safely moved, the following checks
are made:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Removes all blank lines from the input and the output.
.It
Ensures that the number of input files is equal to the number of output files.
This protects against a user accidentally removing a file from the file list.
.It
Ensures that all input files are unique and that all output files are unique.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility also takes care to properly handle name swapping.
If you would attempt to rename the files
.Pa foo ,
.Pa bar ,
and
.Pa baz
to
.Pa bar ,
.Pa baz ,
and
.Pa foo ,
then
.Nm
would make sure that no renaming operations accidentally overwrite the source of
another renaming.
.Pp
As filenames can unfortunately contain newline characters and
.Nm
is a line-oriented tool, all filenames are encoded before being opened in the
editor so that all newlines are replaced by the string
.Dq \en
and all backslashes are replaced by the string
.Dq \e\e .
Once the editor is closed
.Nm
reencodes the filenames, replacing all occurances of the string
.Dq \en
with a newline character and all occurances of the string
.Dq \e\e
with a backslash character.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev EDITOR
Editor to be used to edit the file list.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Rename all files in the current directory:
.Pp
.Dl $ mmv *
.Pp
Rename all of the C source and header files in a projects’ directory:
.Pp
.Dl $ find \&. -type f -name '*.[ch]' -exec mmv {} +
.Pp
Rename all files in the current directory to use hyphens
.Pq Sq -
instead of spaces:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ EDITOR=vim mmv *
$ # Once the vim buffer is open, run the following command:
$ #   :%s/ /-/g
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr mv 1 ,
.Xr vim 1 ,
.Xr rename 2
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Thomas Voss Aq Mt mail@thomasvoss.com
